# Pipeline to build a 3D nucleotide library

Builds libraries of 3D structures of dinucleotide and trinucleotide RNA fragments, at 0.5 A and 1.0 A precision (RMSD), extracted from PDB.
Considering that protein-binding can induce specific local 3D conformations in RNA, while local 3D conformations of unbound RNA are also seen in protein-bound RNA [ref ProtNaff], we consider only the protein-bound RNA structures.

In addition, this repo contains:

- Fragment clustering tools (RMSD-based)
- An algorithm to calculate the closest fit (nearest neighbour = smallest RMSD) of a fragment, excluding fragments from the same PDB;
- An algorithm to quickly estimate the completeness of a set of fragments. Completeness is defined as the percentage of the fragments that have a closest fit within a certain RMSD threshold.
- A tool and interactive notebook that uses the above algorithms to calculate the closest fit per fragment and the completeness for a given Rfam/Pfam family, i.e. considering only fragments from outside the family as candidates for the closest fit (This indicates what percentage of the fragments from a Pfam/Rfam exist outside this Pfam/Rfam, at the chosen RMSD precision). **This notebook can be run online in the browser, no need to download or install any files**

## Obtaining the library

The library consists of sublibraries built at the dinucleotide and trinucleotide level, for each sequence motif and for each precision level (0.5A and 1A). Sequence motifs contain every combination of A and C (4 and 8 motifs for dinucleotide and trinucleotide respectivelly). To extend to A/C/G/U, `lib-mutate.py` must be run after the library has been obtained.

There are three ways to obtain the fragment library:

First, you can run the current pipeline and build the library yourself, as explained in the next section.

Alternatively, instead of building the library yourself, you can download it from the [nucleotide library Git repo](https://github.com/sjdv1982/nucleotide-library).

Finally, the current repo also contains a `download-library.sh` script, which clones the nucleotide library repo and copies its contents into the `output/` and `library/` folders. This allows you to run the closest fit and completeness notebooks from the current repo.

## Library building instructions

### Step 1. Download nucleotide fragments and fragment PDB templates

The main input of the pipeline is a coordinate array of nonredundant nucleotide fragments, previously generated by the nucleotide fragment pipeline. ??

The secondary input is PDB template files, in order to know the residue and atom names of the coordinates.

Both of these are defined as Git submodules. Run the following command to download them:

`git submodule update --init --recursive --progress`

### Step 2. Run the clustering

Clustering is performed using a pairwise RMSD (after Kabsch superposition) cutoff that corresponds to the desired precision. Clustering is performed for each sublibrary with an extra clustering at 2.0A (used for the closest fit computation later on).

For each clustering, the result is obtained by removing iteratively the largest cluster from the fragment pool. The 50 largest clusters are determined probabilistically; for the remaining fragment pool, the full pairwise RMSD matrix is computed.

After the clustering is done, the origin (PDB code provenance) of each cluster is analyzed.

Scripts to run:

- clust.sh (or equivalent script with parallel cluster jobs)
- clust-origin.sh

### Step 3. Build the library

Script to run:

- build-library.sh (or equivalent script with parallel cluster jobs)

## Closest fit computation

This repo contains an algorithm that calculates the closest fit (nearest-neighbour) of each fragment, excluding fragments from the same PDB.

The algorithm is based on multi-resolution analysis, i.e. it takes multiple clusterings and selects/eliminates clusters and fragments based on RMSD triangle inequalities. This is approximately 3-5 times faster than brute force.

Scripts to run:

- closest-fit.sh (or equivalent script with parallel cluster jobs)
- The `closest-fit-analysis` notebook to verify the calculation against a brute force approach.

## Completeness analysis

This analysis aims to estimate if all possible 3D conformations of a fragment have already been seen in the PDB. As an approximation, one can check if all fragments in the PDB also exist in at least one other PDB. 

This repo contains an algorithm to quickly estimate the completeness of a set of fragments. It is based on direct analysis of the clustering, checking for singletons among the clusters and assuming that those have no close neighbors. Therefore, it slightly underestimates the completeness. [add precision obtained on tests ??]

Completeness is defined as the percentage of the fragments for which there exists at least one other fragment (excluding fragments from the same PDB) within a certain RMSD threshold. The brute force approach to compute the closest fitting fragment explicitly. ??  However, even with the multi-resolution approach above, this takes several hours to compute.

In contrast, the direct clustering analysis only requires a clustering at the precision that is equal to the RMSD threshold. After that, the completeness analysis runs within seconds.

Scripts to run:

- Inside the `verification` folder: `classify-fragments.sh`.

- Inside the `verification` folder: one of the `check-all` scripts. `check-all.sh` is the fastest, but this requires that the closest fit analysis in `output/` has been completed first. If this has not been done, you can download it from GitHub using the `download-library.sh` script.
- The notebook in the `verification/` subfolder, to compare the calculation against brute force.

## Context-specific analysis

This analysis aims to estimate if 3D conformations of fragments from a given Rfam (or bound to a given Pfam) are found in PDB structures from another Rfam (or bound to another Pfam). This hints toward the possiblity to model RNA structures of a new Rfam (or bound to a new Pfam) using known 3D conformations of fragments.

This repo contains a tool and interactive notebook that uses the above algorithms to calculate the closest fits and the completeness in a *context-specific* manner. Here, *context* means a binary label that a fragment has or has not: the closest fits are calculated for all fragments within the context, but only fragments without the context are considered as candidates for the closest fit.
An experienced user can supply their own context labeling, but two have been implemented here:

- Is the fragment associated with a certain protein domain family (Pfam)? If the fragment is part of at least one complex where a member of that Pfam interacts with RNA, then the context is positive, else it is negative.
  
- Is the fragment associated with a certain RNA family (Rfam)?

An interactive notebook is provided where the user chooses a library (dinuc or trinuc), a database (Rfam or Pfam), and a family ID. The notebook then quickly computes (an estimate of) the context-specific completeness and then computes the closest fit RMSD, which is then plotted as a histogram. It is possible to select a sample (for each motif) from all fragments with the context. In that case,the calculation will finish within a few minutes, otherwise it takes up to an hour or two (for the largest families).

Script to run:

- Inside the `context-specific` subfolder: the `completess` notebook.

The notebook can also be executed online, without any installation on the user's computer:

- In Google Colab, using [this link](https://colab.research.google.com/github/sjdv1982/nucleotide-build-library/blob/main/context-specific/completeness.ipynb)

- In Binder, using [this link](https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/sjdv1982/nucleotide-build-library/HEAD?urlpath=%2Fdoc%2Ftree%2Fcontext-specific%2Fcompleteness.ipynb)
